<div align="right">25/26</div>

# THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG
## DEPARTMENT OF STATISTICS AND ACTUARIAL SCIENCE
### STAT4601 Time Series Analysis
#### Assignment 1
*(Due date: October 16, 2025)*

---

1. Let $Z_t = a_t - \theta(a_{t-1})^2$, where $\{a_t\}$ is sequence of i.i.d. normal random variables with mean zero and variance $\sigma_a^2$.
    (a) Find the mean function and the ACVF for $\{Z_t\}$.
    (b) Is $\{Z_t\}$ stationary?

2. Are the following time series $\{Z_t\}$ weakly stationary? Specify the reasons for your answers.
    (a) $Z_t = a_t + a_{t-2}^2$, where $\{a_t\}$ are *i.i.d.* normal random variables.
    (b) $Z_t = X_t - X_{t-1}$, where $\{X_t\}$ is a weakly stationary time series.
    (c) $Z_t = a_t + 0.6a_{t-1} + 0.2a_{t-2}$, where $\{a_t\}$ are *i.i.d.* random variables with density $f(x) = 1.5x^{-2.5}$ for $x \geq 1$.
    (d) $Z_t = 0.5Z_{t-1} + a_t$, where $t \geq 1$, $\{a_t\}$ is a white noise and $Z_0 = 1$.
    (e) $Z_t = (-1)^{Y_t}X_t$, where $\{X_t\}$ is a weakly stationary time series with mean zero, $\{Y_t\}$ are *i.i.d.* Poisson random variables, and $\{X_t\}$ and $\{Y_t\}$ are independent.

3. Find the ACF of the following MA processes.
    (a) $Z_t = a_t - 0.5a_{t-1}$.
    (b) $Z_t = a_t - a_{t-1} + 0.5a_{t-2}$.
    (c) $Z_t = a_t + 0.5a_{t-1} - a_{t-2} + 3a_{t-3}$.

4. Consider a stationary ARMA(3,2) model,
    $$Z_t = \phi_1 Z_{t-1} + \phi_2 Z_{t-2} + \phi_3 Z_{t-3} + a_t - a_{t-1} - \theta a_{t-2},$$
    where $\{a_t\}$ is a white noise sequence with mean zero and variance one.
    (a) Find the range of $\theta$ under which the model is invertible.
    (b) Show that
    $$|\phi_3| < 1, \quad 1 - \phi_1 - \phi_2 - \phi_3 > 0 \quad \text{and} \quad 1 + \phi_1 - \phi_2 + \phi_3 > 0.$$

5. Suppose that $\{Y_t\}$ is a sum of an $AR(1)$ series and a white noise series, that is, $Y_t = Z_t + b_t$, where $b_t \sim WN(0,\sigma_W^2)$, and $\{Z_t\}$ satisfies $Z_t = \phi Z_{t-1} + a_t$ with $|\phi| < 1$, $\{a_t\} \sim WN(0,\sigma_a^2)$ and independent of $\{b_t\}$.
    (a) Show that $\{Y_t\}$ is stationary by finding its mean and ACVF.
    (b) Show that $U_t = Y_t - \phi Y_{t-1}$ has no correlation beyond lag 1, and so that $\{U_t\} \sim MA(1)$.
    (c) Is $\{Y_t\}$ an ARMA series? If yes, determine the order(s) of the model.

6. Consider a time series model
    $$Z_t = 5 + 0.1Z_{t-1} + 0.8Z_{t-2} + a_t - 0.5a_{t-1} - 0.4a_{t-2},$$
    where $\{a_t\}$ is a white noise with mean zero and variance one.
    (a) Is it stationary? Is it invertible? Specify the reasons for your answers.
    (b) Find out the MA and AR representations if they exist.
    (c) Find out the autocovariance function $\gamma_k$ for $k \geq 0$.
    (d) Find out the mean and the variance of $\nabla Z_t$.

7. Consider a time series model
    $$Z_t = 5 + 0.3Z_{t-1} + 0.5Z_{t-2} + e^{a_t},$$
    where $\{a_t\}$ is an i.i.d. sequence with the standard normal distribution.
    (a) Is it an AR model? Rewrite it in the standard form if your answer is positive.
    (b) Is the model stationary? Specify the reasons for your answers.
    (c) Find out the general linear process form if it exist.